---
title: "Why I Don't Use Smart Watches (for now)"
date: 2022-01-15T12:41:37-05:00
draft: false
---

A few friends and I took part in the MakeUofT hackathon (a couple years ago) - we built a tool that could assess whether plants in a greenhouse were healthy using a camera and some computer vision tricks (mostly looking at how the water flowed through the veins of the leaves). We won the Telus Prize for our work and each of us got an Apple Watch.  

I had been reading about wearables and their potential to detect biomarkers. Videos like **[Can you really tell if a kid is lying](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6diqpGKOvic&ab_channel=TED)** and posts like **[Smartwatch can detect early signs of illness](https://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2020/12/smartwatch-can-detect-early-signs-of-illness.html)** impressed upon me a game-changing potential to make diagnoses more accurate and prognoses more reliable. As you can tell, I was very exicted to try it out. That is not to say my expectations were not tempered by what I had seen in ads (or rather had not seen). I understood that this kind of medical technology might not become mainstream until Apple had the requisite confidence to market it as a medical device - or rather, the data would not be accepted as such without the continued maturity of the product. 

I tried it on, and it felt familiar (I have an iphone). There were some annoying notifications reminding me to breathe (thanks watch - I almost forgot to breathe for the past 10 minutes!) but I did appreciate its reminders to get up and move around. It had to be paired to my phone and it had to be close enough to my phone to use its full capabilities. 

Every now and then, I would get a message from a friend or a notification about an email. I would look down at my hand, try to read it on the watch and usually, try to respond back. It is not particularly easy to respond back on the device (unless I can draw or speak which is not always easy or possible). It is usually faster for me to just pull out my phone. Naturally, if I am going to pull out my phone anyway, I might as well read the message on my phone too. Eventually, the role of the watch became limited to triaging events. If I felt like a notification was important for me to respond to now, I would answer it and if it were not, I could ignore it until I eventually pulled out my phone. I don't know how willing I would be to buy an expensive triager... I'm not so busy that I can't pull out my phone to shave 500 ms.

Wearing a smart watch also imposes expectations about my availability. A friend had a phone that did not quite work well, and he could only really answer messages when he got back home. It created an expectation that he was only available during certain parts of the day. If I wanted to have a rousing philosophical discussion with him, I knew that there was only a pre-determined block of time when he would be available for that. I could always call him and send him messages throughout the day, and he would only ever respond to my texts at that point in the day (he would pick up calls whenever). But if I had an expectation to have a synchronous conversation with him, it would have to be during this time. Texting/mailing/emailing/etc. made our conversations asynchronous and the technologies created and shifted expectations about how we interact with one another. However, instant messaging has shifted those asynchronous expectations for messaging - some of my friends expect a quick answer and some do not care when I respond (so long as it is within a bounded period). I try to reciprocate those expectations, but naturally, I might not have the same schedule as the person trying to talk to me. Seeing a smart watch on my wrist shifted my friends' expectations about when I would be able to see their messages. Before I put on the watch: if I were busy, I could still look at my phone and continue working if the message did not seem urgent ("Look at this cute cat!"). Not to say I'm an ungrateful friend that doesn't like cats but clearly, I've abused the benefit of doubt afforded to me by my friends who might be wondering when I'll take a look at their videos. After putting on the watch, however, there was an expectation that I would at least acknowledge the message whenever my wrist vibrated (which is hard to ignore) and I would consequently see the message. The expectation was that I was always available and I noticed I wasn't as productive as when I didn't have a watch.

My impression of Focus Time was that it addressed this issue by not showing notifications during a certain user-defined period. However, it's not clear (on the platforms that have enabled this) that the sender has an indication that they are sending a message during someone else's focus time. They might put two and two together but I'd rather not leave that to interpretation. This is an engineering problem, though, and not an indictment of the underlying product. 

More generally, this piece is not an indictment of the technology; on the contrary, I am a big fan of wearables.  I wear the watch when I go hiking and it provides a lot of utility as a fitness tracker (and it tells the time **[unlike this](https://youtu.be/AzGePmv0GD8?t=45)** :P). Rather, this is an indictment of the expectations it creates and how the product needs to be more mature and have more utility to justify those expectations.   

All this being said, it's clear it provides enough utility to **[millions](https://www.macworld.co.uk/news/how-many-apple-watches-sold-3801687/)**. Most likely, the ubiquity of the product will shift expectations.

Update: A few friends have drawn parallels to early-stage technologies that didn't quite have the right product fit in the beginning but were ultimately revolutionary. I don't disagree with that assessment but I would like to clarify my position: I liken smart watches to modern cars without modern roads. They're great technologies but without the infrastructure (expectations, confidence in medical capabilities, usage in payments, etc.) they're just expensive jewelry (I imagine that is the point of jewelry in certain circles) that I have to charge. I feel similarly towards Tesla's Autopilot. It's nowhere near **[autonomy - pg4](https://guidehouseinsights.com/-/media/project/navigant-research/navigant-research-executive-summaries/2021/2q-2021/guidehouse-insights-leaderboard-automated-driving-systems-executive-summarypdf.pdf)** but the ambitious naming and the timeline of promises surrounding it suggest it is closer to autonomy whereas a more accurate description would be to say it is closer to ADAS. The technology simply isn't at the stage touted by senior leadership but it creates expectations that could prove to be **[deadly](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/tesla-driver-charged-manslaughter-deadly-autopilot-crash-raises-new-le-rcna12987)**. The auto industry in general has this problem (although they're more honest with their jargon) - some are introducing advanced ADAS features (e.g. lane assist) under the condition that the user stay vigilant and continue looking at the road. These systems take away autonomy from the user with the promise of convenience. It's up to car owners on deciding whether that is a good bargain. But perhaps because they're more honest with their naming, expectations for the feature do not exceed the features themselves: car owners have a better idea of what the limitations of their vehicles are and can make an informed decision about whether they want that vehicle.

Would love to chat if you feel differently (or similarly): <ankil335@gmail.com>

Thanks to **[Dhrumil Patel](https://dhrumilp15.github.io/)** for looking over the piece.

